softperipheral: Add initial sQSPI (#1694)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrfxlib: softperipheral/doc/sQSPI/nrf54H20_porting_v0_1_0.rst

.. _nrf54H20_porting_guide:

> nRF54H20 porting guide

Reviewer: I find there is too much duplication between this section and the 54L15 one, but I will leave it to @b-gent to comment on it.

Reviewer 2: I agree, there's a lot of duplication, but when I ran a diff on it, it showed few changes across the doc (additional tables and code-blocks), so if we were to create tabs for it I think it could be confusing. For now I'd leave it as is but I'll keep thinking of some other solution

######################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

This page provides a comprehensive overview of the code structure, file hierarchy, and essential configurations and requirements needed to successfully port and implement an sQSPI aplication on the nRF54H20 device.

.. _nrf54h20_porting_guide_code:

sQSPI Application code
**********************

> This structure shows the relevant files and directories in the `sdk-nrfxlib`_ :

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This structure shows the relevant files and directories in the `sdk-nrfxlib`_ repository:
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

Reviewer 2: this one isn't addressed

      └── sQSPI
          ├── include
          │   └── hal
          │       └── nrf_qspi2.h
          │   ├── nrf54h20
          │   │   ├── sqspi_firmware.h
          │   │   ├── sqspi_firmware_v0.1.0.h
          │   │   └── ...
          │   ├── nrf_sp_qspi.h
          │   ├── nrfx_config_qspi2.h
          │   ├── nrfx_qspi2.h
          └── src
              └── nrfx_qspi2.c

.. note::
   The main interface for sQSPI is the :file:`nrfx_qspi2.h` file.

Header files
============

For an sQSPI application to function correctly, it requires specific header files used by the driver code (internal paths) and specific header files for nrfx (external dependencies).
You must include paths to these files in the build environment's list of include paths.
The following list is a detailed breakdown of the necessary paths:

* Repository internal paths:

  * :file:`softperipheral/include` - Soft peripherals register interface and metadata
  * :file:`softperipheral/sQSPI/include` - sQSPI register interface and driver header
  * :file:`softperipheral/sQSPI/include/nRF54H20` - sQSPI FLPR firmware

* External dependencies:

   * Path to nrfx to include the main nrfx header file - :file:`nrfx.h`.

>    * Path to nrfx/drivers/include, to include nrfx driver header files - For example :file:`nrfx_dppi.h`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * Path to :file:`nrfx/drivers/include`, to include nrfx driver header files - For example :file:`nrfx_dppi.h`.
```

Author: this is meant to be a reference to a path in `nrfx` repo, my understanding is that this is outside of `nrfxlib`, this section contains some `:file:` prefixes, would these links be resolved and rendered properly?

Reviewer 2: :file: is a common sphinx directive, it should render the same way as it renders in every sphinx-based environment

>    * Path to the application specific headers and macros - For example :file:`nrfx_glue.h`, :file:`nrfx_log.h` or a config header.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * Path to the application-specific headers and macros - For example, :file:`nrfx_glue.h`, :file:`nrfx_log.h` or a config header.
```

     See an example configuration for the :file:`nrfx_config.h` file:

      .. code-block:: c

         #ifndef NRFX_CONFIG_H__
         #define NRFX_CONFIG_H__

         #include "softperipheral_regif.h" // To Resolve correct VPR IRQn for the SoC.
         #define nrfx_qspi2_irq_handler        SP_VPR_IRQHandler

         #define NRFX_QSPI2_ENABLED            (1)
         #define NRFX_QSPI2_MAX_NUM_DATA_LINES (4)

         #endif // NRFX_CONFIG_H__

Source files
============

> For an sQSPI application to function properly, it is essential to compile the driver implementation from the source file :file:`nrfx_qspi2.c`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an sQSPI application to function properly, you must compile the driver implementation from the source file :file:`nrfx_qspi2.c`.
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

> Application Core and FLPR configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Application core and FLPR configuration
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

***************************************

> For an sQSPI application to run properly, nRF54H20 must run at highest base clock frequency. The user/integrator should take care of this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an sQSPI application to run properly,  you must adjust the settings for the nRF54H20 SoC to run at highest base clock frequency. 
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

.. note::

>    In any of the following settings, is assumed that the user/integrator has allocated memory for the data pointers used by the sQSPI driver, this memory space must be accessible by both Application Core and FLPR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In any of the following settings, it is assumed that you have allocated memory for the data pointers used by the sQSPI driver.
   This allocated memory space must be accessible by both the application core and the FLPR core.
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

>    This allocated memory is independent from the one listed in :ref:`nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration`, the intention is for it to serve as shared memory for communication rather than containing the sQSPI executable code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The memory is independent from the one outlined in the :ref:`nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration` subsection. 
   It is designated to function as shared memory for communication purposes, rather than to store the sQSPI executable code.
```

>    In any of the following settings, it is assumed that the user/integrator has enabled FLPR to access the ``MEMCONF`` peripheral, this is necessary to properly deactivate sQSPI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In any of the following settings, it is assumed that you have enabled the FLPR access to the MEMCONF peripheral.
   This access is necessary to properly deactivate sQSPI.
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

> Secure settings
> ===============
> 
> * The Application Core in nRF54H20 must be running in a secure setting (TrustZone Secure).
> * The FLPR instance must be running in a secure setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secure settings
===============

In a secure configuration, both the application core and the FLPR core of the nRF54H20 device must operate within a secure environment enabled by TrustZone Secure.
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

Non-Secure settings
===================

> * The Application Core in nRF54H20 must be running in a non-secure setting (Without TrustZone Secure).
> * The FLPR instance must be running in a non-secure setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a non-secure configuration, both the application core and the FLPR core of the nRF54H20 device must operate outside the secure environment (without TrustZone).
```

GPIO configuration
******************

> The following table provides a detailed configuration for each GPIO pin used in the sQSPI application, there are two options, it is assumed that FLPR has access to them:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The table below details the configuration for each GPIO pin used in the sQSPI application.
The following options are available, assuming that the FLPR core has access to these pins:
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

.. list-table::
   :widths: 10 10 20 20 20
   :header-rows: 1

   * - GPIO pin
     - sQSPI Role
     - Direction config
     - Input config
     - Pin Pull config
   * - **P7.0**
     - SCK
     - Output
     - Disconnected
     - No Pull
   * - **P7.1**
     - IO0
     - Output
     - Connected
     - Pull-up

>    * - **P7.2**
>      - IO1
>      - Output
>      - Connected
>      - Pull-up
>    * - **P7.3**
>      - IO2
>      - Output
>      - Connected
>      - Pull-up
>    * - **P7.4**
>      - IO3
>      - Output
>      - Connected
>      - Pull-up
>    * - **P7.5**
>      - CSN
>      - Output
>      - Disconnected
>      - No Pull
> 
> .. list-table::
>    :widths: 10 10 20 20 20
>    :header-rows: 1
> 
>    * - GPIO pin
>      - sQSPI Role
>      - Direction config
>      - Input config
>      - Pin Pull config
>    * - **P9.0**
>      - SCK
>      - Output
>      - Disconnected
>      - No Pull
>    * - **P9.1**
>      - IO0
>      - Output
>      - Connected
>      - Pull-up
>    * - **P9.2**
>      - IO1
>      - Output
>      - Connected
>      - Pull-up
>    * - **P9.3**
>      - IO2
>      - Output
>      - Connected
>      - Pull-up
>    * - **P9.4**
>      - IO3
>      - Output
>      - Connected
>      - Pull-up
>    * - **P9.5**
>      - CSN
>      - Output
>      - Disconnected
>      - No Pull

Reviewer 2: I feel we could use some tabs here

```suggestion
.. tabs::

   .. tab:: **P7** GPIO pins

    .. list-table::
      :widths: 10 10 20 20 20
      :header-rows: 1

      * - GPIO pin
        - sQSPI Role
        - Direction config
        - Input config
        - Pin Pull config
      * - **P7.0**
        - SCK
        - Output
        - Disconnected
        - No Pull
      * - **P7.1**
        - IO0
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P7.2**
        - IO1
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P7.3**
        - IO2
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P7.4**
        - IO3
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P7.5**
        - CSN
        - Output
        - Disconnected
        - No Pull

   .. tab:: **P9** GPIO pins

    .. list-table::
      :widths: 10 10 20 20 20
      :header-rows: 1

      * - GPIO pin
        - sQSPI Role
        - Direction config
        - Input config
        - Pin Pull config
      * - **P9.0**
        - SCK
        - Output
        - Disconnected
        - No Pull
      * - **P9.1**
        - IO0
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.2**
        - IO1
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.3**
        - IO2
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.4**
        - IO3
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.5**
        - CSN
        - Output
        - Disconnected
        - No Pull
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

.. note::

>    sQSPI driver provides a default GPIO configuration/multiplexing for the user, depending on :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` and :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` being set to ``false``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   sQSPI driver provides a default GPIO configuration and multiplexing. 
   This setup is applied when both :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` and :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` are set to ``false``.
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

> How to configure pins
> =====================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configuring pins
================
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

> There are cases in which the sQSPI driver configuration has to be modified, for example: changing pin drive strength to guarantee signal integrity for a new PCB design. You must address these cases on the sQSPI application code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In some cases, you might have to modify the sQSPI driver configuration. 
For example, when changing pin drive strength to guarantee signal integrity for a new PCB design. 
You must address these cases on the sQSPI application code:
```

> * If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO configuration is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. This is a requirement for nRF54H20.
> * If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO multiplexing is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. This is a requirement for nRF54H20.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO configuration is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. 
  This is a requirement for the nRF54H20 device.
* If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO multiplexing is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. 
  This is a requirement for the nRF54H20 device.
```

> GPIO multiplexing must be handled by setting the correct `CTRLSEL` value in UICR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GPIO multiplexing must be handled by setting the correct ``CTRLSEL`` value in UICR.
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

> 
> The sQSPI application requires FastPad bias configuration to run at high frequency on SCLK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, the sQSPI application requires FastPad bias configuration to run at high frequency on SCLK.
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

Memory retention configuration
******************************

> The sQSPI Soft Peripheral requires RAM retention in order to go into the lowest power consumption mode (API call to :c:func:`nrfx_qspi2_deactivate`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The sQSPI Soft Peripheral requires RAM retention in order to go into the lowest power consumption mode, which can be called through the :c:func:`nrfx_qspi2_deactivate` API.
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

.. _nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration:

RAM Configuration
*****************

> The sQSPI Soft Peripheral operates directly from non-cached RAM.

Reviewer 3: Is it required to put sQSPI code in non-cached RAM, or is it enough to have IPC data regions non-cached?

Author: RAM allocation in table is non-cacheable

Reviewer 3: What do you mean by "allocation in table"?

To be clear, I understand we have the following parts of memory in RAM used by soft peripherals:

* Soft Peripheral VPR code
* Soft Peripheral data (stack, static data)
* IPC between the host CPU and the VPR
  * control messages
  * data buffers

Let's consider cacheability (data cache) of each of these parts, looking from the host CPU perspective:

* SoftPeripheral VPR code - if the code is copied to a cacheable memory, the host must write-back data cache before starting VPR
* Soft Peripheral data - if the initialized static data is copied by the host to cacheable memory, the host must write-back data cache before starting VPR
* IPC - complex cache management is required on each message exchanged between VPR and the host CPU

I thought the reason for requiring the use of non-cacheable memory was to avoid the complex cache management for IPC messages. Is my understanding correct?

Reviewer 3: Yes, by IPC I meant shared RAM used for Inter-Processor Communication (virtual register interface, or any other communication protocol).

I think it should be clarified in this document if the non-cacheability requirement applies to the shared RAM only of other RAM regions as well.

Author: Will reword as: `The memory region defined by the following table is non-cacheable`

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrfxlib/commit/20f7251d5b9afbc5e90120850187543769d90d71

> Your build environment must reserve the required RAM and ensure that it is readable/writable by both the Application Core and the FLPR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your build environment must reserve the required RAM and ensure that it is readable and writable by both the application core and the FLPR core.
```

Author: Addressed in f5a94569e4ecb07aa7a721f56a57160774b42c34

The following is the configuration required for the RAM:

.. list-table:: RAM Configuration Table
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Start Address
     - Size
   * - 0x2f890000
     - 0x4000

> The build environment described in the :ref:`nrf54h20_porting_guide_code` section must comply with this requirements.
> This includes proper settings in linker scripts, device tree specifications (DTS), and resource allocation.

Reviewer 2: If it's a general remark, shouldn't this appear somewhere at the beginning of this guide?
```suggestion
The build environment described in the :ref:`nrf54h20_porting_guide_code` section must comply with these requirements.
This includes proper settings in linker scripts, device tree specifications (DTS), and resource allocation.
```

          │   │   ├── sqspi_firmware.h
          │   │   ├── sqspi_firmware_v0.1.0.h
          │   │   └── ...
          │   ├── nrf_sp_qspi.h
          │   ├── nrfx_config_qspi2.h
          │   ├── nrfx_qspi2.h
          └── src
              └── nrfx_qspi2.c

.. note::
   The main interface for sQSPI is the :file:`nrfx_qspi2.h` file.

Header files
============

For an sQSPI application to function correctly, it requires specific header files used by the driver code (internal paths) and specific header files for nrfx (external dependencies).
You must include paths to these files in the build environment's list of include paths.
The following list is a detailed breakdown of the necessary paths:

* Repository internal paths:

  * :file:`softperipheral/include` - Soft peripherals register interface and metadata
  * :file:`softperipheral/sQSPI/include` - sQSPI register interface and driver header
  * :file:`softperipheral/sQSPI/include/nrf54h20` - sQSPI FLPR firmware

* External dependencies:

   * Path to nrfx to include the main nrfx header file - :file:`nrfx.h`.
   * Path to nrfx/drivers/include, to include nrfx driver header files - For example :file:`nrfx_dppi.h`.

>    * Path to the application-specific headers and macros - For example :file:`nrfx_glue.h`, :file:`nrfx_log.h` or a config header.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * Path to the application-specific headers and macros - For example, :file:`nrfx_glue.h`, :file:`nrfx_log.h`, or a configuration header.
```

Author: will append the `:file:` prefix to the paths, I thought this would try to create a link and fail

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrfxlib/commit/c5b23b6a9e4fade0d5429f7eb9c1b3e19f824a2c

     See an example configuration for the :file:`nrfx_config.h` file:

      .. code-block:: c

         #ifndef NRFX_CONFIG_H__
         #define NRFX_CONFIG_H__

         #include "softperipheral_regif.h" // To Resolve correct VPR IRQn for the SoC.
         #define nrfx_qspi2_irq_handler        SP_VPR_IRQHandler

         #define NRFX_QSPI2_ENABLED            (1)
         #define NRFX_QSPI2_MAX_NUM_DATA_LINES (4)

         #endif // NRFX_CONFIG_H__

Source files
============

For an sQSPI application to function properly, you must compile the driver implementation from the source file :file:`nrfx_qspi2.c`.

> Application core and FLPR configuration
> ***************************************

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Application core and FLPR core configuration
********************************************
```

> For an sQSPI application to run properly, you must adjust the settings for the nRF54H20 SoC to run at highest base clock frequency. The user/integrator should take care of this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an sQSPI application to run properly,  you must adjust the settings for the nRF54H20 SoC to run at highest base clock frequency. 
```
These were not addressed for any of the occurrences, please fix

.. note::
   In any of the following settings, it is assumed that you have allocated memory for the data pointers used by the sQSPI driver.

   The memory is independent from the one outlined in the :ref:`nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration` subsection.
   It is designated to function as shared memory for communication purposes, rather than containing the sQSPI executable code.

   In any of the following settings, it is assumed that you have enabled the FLPR access to the ``MEMCONF`` peripheral.
   This access is necessary to properly deactivate sQSPI

Secure settings
===============

In as secure configuration, both the application core and the FLPR core of the nRF54H20 device must operate within a secure environment enabled by TrustZone Secure.

> Non-Secure settings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Non-secure settings
```

      * - **P9.3**
        - IO2
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.4**
        - IO3
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.5**
        - CSN
        - Output
        - Disconnected
        - No Pull

.. note::
   sQSPI driver provides a default GPIO configuration and multiplexing.
   This setup is applied when both :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` and :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` are set to ``false``.

Configuring pins
================

In some cases you might have to modify the sQSPI driver configuration.
For example, when changing pin drive strength to guarantee signal integrity for a new PCB design.
You must address these cases on the sQSPI application code:

* If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO configuration is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. 
  This is a requirement for the nRF54H20 device.
* If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO multiplexing is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. 

>   This is a requirement for the nRF54H20 device.

Reviewer 4: why can't dts be used for this?

Author: Any comments here @anangl ?

Reviewer 3: This driver does not depend on the .dts infrastructure. You can set `skip_pmux_cfg = true` and configure the GPIO multiplexing in any way available to the application, potentially using the device tree if that's the proper way in the integration environment (e.g. Zephyr).

GPIO multiplexing must be handled by setting the correct ``CTRLSEL`` value in UICR.

Additionally, the sQSPI application requires FastPad bias configuration to run at high frequency on SCLK.

Memory retention configuration
******************************

The sQSPI Soft Peripheral requires RAM retention in order to go into the lowest power consumption mode, which can be called through the :c:func:`nrfx_qspi2_deactivate` API.

.. _nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration:

> RAM Configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RAM configuration
```

         #define NRFX_QSPI2_ENABLED            (1)
         #define NRFX_QSPI2_MAX_NUM_DATA_LINES (4)

         #endif // NRFX_CONFIG_H__

Source files
============

For an sQSPI application to function properly, you must compile the driver implementation from the source file :file:`nrfx_qspi2.c`.

Application core and FLPR configuration
***************************************

For an sQSPI application to run properly, you must adjust the settings for the nRF54H20 SoC to run at highest base clock frequency. The user/integrator should take care of this.

.. note::
   In any of the following settings, it is assumed that you have allocated memory for the data pointers used by the sQSPI driver.

   The memory is independent from the one outlined in the :ref:`nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration` subsection.
   It is designated to function as shared memory for communication purposes, rather than containing the sQSPI executable code.

   In any of the following settings, it is assumed that you have enabled the FLPR access to the ``MEMCONF`` peripheral.
   This access is necessary to properly deactivate sQSPI

Security configuration
======================

Secure
----------

> In as secure configuration, both the application core and the FLPR core of the nRF54H20 device must operate within a secure environment enabled by TrustZone Secure.

Reviewer 3: typo: 
```suggestion
In a secure configuration, both the application core and the FLPR core of the nRF54H20 device must operate within a secure environment enabled by TrustZone Secure.
```

* If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO configuration is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. 
  This is a requirement for the nRF54H20 device.
* If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO multiplexing is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. 
  This is a requirement for the nRF54H20 device.

GPIO multiplexing must be handled by setting the correct ``CTRLSEL`` value in UICR.

Additionally, the sQSPI application requires FastPad bias configuration to run at high frequency on SCLK.

Memory retention configuration
******************************

The sQSPI Soft Peripheral requires RAM retention in order to go into the lowest power consumption mode, which can be called through the :c:func:`nrfx_qspi2_deactivate` API.

.. _nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration:

RAM Configuration
*****************

The sQSPI Soft Peripheral operates from RAM.
Your build environment must reserve the required RAM and ensure that it is readable and writable by both the application core and the FLPR core.

> This table details the memory region, it should be non-cacheable:

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
This table details the memory region, it must be non-cacheable:
```
If we use softer wording like "shall" or "should", we should describe what happens if the reader decides not to follow the recommendation.
